9/11 Caused the AI Boom
Well, it helped. A lot.
The Level Truth
Sep 20, 2025
A political cartoon from September 11, 1901: An angry, patriotic eagle, representing McKinley, stands near a nest labeled 'The U.S.A.' on a rocky outcropping labeled 'Liberty.' The eagle holds in its talon a snake, labeled 'anarchy,' representing Czolgosz. The snake is wild-haired and wild-eyed, invoking racist stereotypes. The caption reads: "The American Eagle--There's no room for you in this nest."
The more things change, the more they stay the same. America fighting off the bearded foreign aggressors. This cartoon is about the assassination of William McKinley by an anarchist, but published before McKinley died from his wounds. It’s dated exactly 100 years before 9/11.

This post started as a diatribe on Wealth Inequality. But in my research, I noticed something about the influence of Artificial Intelligence on the subject. Twelve companies, all over one trillion dollars, now control assets comparable to 25% of the world’s Gross Domestic Product. Eight of them are tech companies, and six of those have increased their market share to more than one trillion dollars since 2020. Two of them are now over four trillion: Microsoft and Nvidia. Nvidia is the largest, and I’ll get into why I think this is later. The point I’m trying to make is: the AI argument is not new, but it has accelerated the wealth gap at a pace heretofore unseen. And the post-9/11 War on Terror was an enormous, Black Swan catalyst.

After the September 11 attacks, the United States and other governments started to direct substantial resources to digital warfare. Despite warnings from civil rights groups and privacy watchdogs, the PATRIOT Act passed with overwhelming political and popular support. Ben Franklin, when reached for comment, was spinning at relativistic speeds. The United States faced its largest consolidation and rearrangement of powers and responsibilities since the formation of the Department of Defense after the Allied victory in WWII. And where the money went, so went the tech research. New advances in biometric data collection, big data analytics, and cryptography made counter-terrorism better (which made better terrorists, see “idiot-proof”). It also made privacy much, much worse, but that’s not what this essay is about. These technologies have made some people and corporations ‘wealthy beyond the dreams of avarice,’ at the expense of the rest of us.

It’s very easy to draw a line from the War on Terror to modern AI and wealth inequality. I’ll show you. 9/11→PATRIOT Act→Fancy New Digital Toys→AI. What does that have to do with wealth inequality? Well, the concentration of wealth since the dawn of the Industrial Age, and wealth and technology in general, have always swelled after wars. Like Baron Rothschild supposedly said, “when there’s blood in the streets, buy property.” The Civil War led to Reconstruction and the Reconstruction Amendments. These led to The 1877 Compromise, which ended Reconstruction and turbo-boosted the Gilded Age. James Watt had already made Steam Power profitable before the War, but the investment in communications, logistics (especially railroads), and science that powered the Union Victory handed these advancements over to the corporations once the War and Reconstruction were over. The Ku Klux Klan and Southern Democrats forced sharecropping on Black southerners. This, and turmoil in Europe and China, plus the ‘need’ for cheap labor, brought millions to American cities and the New West, seeking a better life. Those in power, political and financial, seized on the desperation of millions to multiply their hoards.

Those ‘fancy new digital toys’ I mentioned, and the three areas in particular that stood out in my research, biometric identification, big data, and cryptography, helped create a perfect storm for generative, predictive, and analytical artificial intelligence to emerge. All it needed was a match, and Google lit the fuse in 2017 (although Nvidia placed that fuse with CUDA in 2006). Transformer Architecture, harnessing the parallel processing power that had hitherto profited mainly from interactive entertainment, started the modern AI Boom. Nvidia rode the wave of cryptocurrency and GPU profitability straight into a near-monopoly on AI chips, making it the world’s largest company. Broadcom and TSMC provided the critical manufacturing, and got on the Big Twelve themselves. Since 2001, these companies, and the people and Investment Firms that own them, have hoarded wealth like dragons. Not just money, although that’s all moving up faster than usual. These companies and individuals, since they are the same thing now, wield enormous political and social power. Power that was ceded to them in bits and pieces in the form of consumer data.
Six small clay tokens on a green background: three round tokens, a flat cylinder, a tetrahedron, and a cone.
(Fig. 1) Tokens from Tepe Gawra, present day Iraq, ca. 4000 BC. Cone, sphere, and flat disk are three measures of cereals: small, larger, largest. Tetrahedron is a unit of work (one man/one day? ). Courtesy the University Museum, the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.

It was easy, back in the old days of the Atlantic World, to see who the enemy was. If a king was oppressing his people, they sometimes had to kill him. Nobody really had banks. Resources meant power. Land meant power. Soldiers meant power. The ‘money’ in this context was derived from the divine right of kings. This was the last time physical strength translated into absolute power. Because Money took over. The wealthy of antiquity, also the controlling political force, were land holders and senators. With the collapse of the Western Roman Empire, kings came back, but this time they doled out land and power more stingily. Feudalism still relied on the divine right of kings, and now they even had a scapegoat for societal ills. Antisemitism coalesced around Jewish Bankers, who took over the task of Wealth Management after the Church declared usury a sin. The Shylock demanding his Pound of Flesh has evolved into… whatever the hell modern antisemitism is. Resisting had become even more taboo. Wat Tyler’s Rebellion and The Hussite Revolution were outliers, the Spiders Georg of speaking truth to power in the dark ages. Finally came the Enlightenment. Now all men are equal. Except, as Saint Carlin put it, ‘Indians and N*****s and Women.’ The French and American Revolutions finally put those kings in their place! We free thinkers finally had our own safe space. But, to paraphase Orwell, some were more free to think than others.

The connection between wealth and power has long been studied, debated, and practiced. Historically, VOC is the fore-runner to PetroChina and Saudi Aramco, the two political corporations in the Big Twelve. The Dutch East India Company (VOC) exploded in power and wealth because they helped invent Market Capitalism. Given incredible state-level power, harnessing industrial espionage, financed by the people’s investment, and ruled by the twin edicts of profit and sovereign power, VOC turned The Netherlands into a global power. England, France, and Spain were making money the old-fashioned way, by stealing it. Portugal and The Netherlands wanted in on the action, but didn’t have the human or financial capital, so they turned to an early form of cyberwarfare. Portugal made detailed maps, while the Dutch made better cargo ships. Then they duked it out on the world stage, stealing information, knocking down stategic forts, controlling vital trade bottlenecks. What they lacked in physical strength, they made up for with data.

Until the digital age, wealth and power were augmented by data; whoever had the best information got rich the fastest. Today, data and power are one and the same. Power has become the best data infrastructure, the most comprehensive data sets, the fastest AIs. The competition is messy, far more volatile than even the Gilded Age. Sure, a bad investment in 1890 could land you in the poorhouse, but today’s culture of fiduciary law, tech supremacy as national security, “too big to fail,” and AI-driven risk management, have smoothed the potholes of traditional investment. Now anyone can give their money to the capitalists and make a fortune! The American Dream is history’s biggest Nigerian Prince Scam.

I’m not saying it’s all hopeless. This timeline of wealth and power is not meant to dissuade anyone from speaking their truth, especially right in the face of power. But there are no easy answers. Social Democrats try, with what we have, to build a sustainable future and peace and prosperity for everyone. Anarchists try to do good, even in the face of overwhelming discrimination. While I admire both, their solutions are incomplete. Social democracy tries to work within the free-market economy to show how it could be used to help humanity. But by the nature of the problems, the solutions have to be systemic overhauls. Anarchists are often, understandably, reluctant to organize with any group, their own or in a social democracy. Without a revolutionary fire, often outsourced to anarchists to ‘get the party started,’ there will be no change. We need the anarchist perspective as much as we need the socialist one. We have to talk, and we have to talk fast. That’s been the focus of this blog, and my current writing project. We, the progressives, have to work together to make the needed changes, and we have to do it soon. To those whom free-market capitalism is the reality and is here to stay, I submit Ursula K. LeGuin:

“We live in capitalism, its power seems inescapable - but then, so did the divine right of kings. Any human power can be resisted and changed by human beings. Resistance and change often begin in art. Very often in our art, the art of words.”

Let’s talk.

Post Script: Propaganda is alive and well. Forbes and Investopedia gave me some perfect examples. The Forbes Article frames ‘contrarian investing’ as a good thing, even dismissing out of hand it’s own title, ‘Buy when there’s blood in the streets’ by trying to contextualize Baron Rothschild’s quote with a blatant lie. Investopedia is more insidious, and not very obvious. What appears to be a clinical examination of the wealth gap is subtle, confirmation bias propaganda. Look at the numbers in the ‘takeaways’ section: you need 400k a year, you need 14 million dollars, you only make 80k a year, there’s fewer that 3,000 billionaires, and they control $14T. Your brain, looking for answers on how to retire comfortably, internalizes these numbers. 400k is only five times what you’re making now. No problem, you’re making five times what you were making in High School. You need $14M to join the 1%. Big, but doable. A number of Baby Boomers retired millionaires from white collar jobs. Only 3,000 billionaires? You can’t get in that club, but it’s really selective anyway. They only have $14T of the world’s $400T in assets? No big deal! But the article isn’t about billionaires, it’s about the 1%, who control, as I’ve linked elsewhere, a whole lot more.

“Bibliography”
1877 Compromise
9/11
AI: Analytical
AI: Generative
AI: Predictive
Atlantic World
Black Swan Events
CISSP All-In-One Certification Guide
Citizens United v. FEC
CUDA Toolkit
Cyberwarfare
Demographics of Billionaires
Edward Moore
Faure, Samuel: The Anarchists - What they are, what they are not
Financial Risk Management
Fluyt
Geekforgeek: Big Data
George Carlin
Gilded Age
Gilded Age Immigration
Jan Huyghen van Linschoten
History For Humans (YouTube): Jacod Riis
History of Money
“Idiot-Proof”
Investment Company
James Watt
"Jewish Space Lasers"
Library of Congress: The Consilia of Alessandro Nievo
List of Biggest Companies
Love Maps On...: The Age of Discovery
NIH Facial Recognition in 2021
Hussite Wars
NVIDIA Corporation Homepage
NVIDIA and bitcoin
OECD: Inequalities in Household Wealth and Financial Insecurity of Households
Oxfam 1% Study
Portugese Empire
Reconstruction Amendments
Risk Management
Sharecropping During Reconstruction
Tammany Hall
TechNode: NVIDIA, Broadcom, and TSMC
Transformer Architecture
Transformers for Image Recognition at Scale
Urban.org: Nine Charts on Wealth Inequality in America
Wat Tyler’s Rebellion
World Inequality Database: Wealth Gap 1800-2025
Worldometer GDP list

Additional Reading:
Chinese Exclusion Act
Haymarket Massacre
Homestead Acts
Junk Science, Pseudoscience
Lodge Bill
Luddites
Maȟpíya Lúta or Red Cloud
Newcomb’s Problem
Pareto Efficiency
Schmandt-Besserat, Denise: Tokens: their Significance for the Origin of Counting and Writing
