The AI-Creativity Debate
It's not as simple as some people make it out to be.
The Level Truth
Sep 13, 2025

I’ve noticed, in my research for my writing, a lot of people don’t really understand neurodivergence. It’s a tough nut to crack, at least for me. I find it difficult to articulate my challenges, because I can’t explain how my brain works. And neither can science, yet. So explaining my position on the AI-Creativity debate gets a little nuanced.

My particular brand of “neuro-spicy” is different from anyone else. My unique combination of diagnoses and experience informs my every thought. I’ve had at least one dismissive comment directed at me for my creative process, which includes using an AI for organization and research. My process uses a modern tool that can moderate my worst symptoms and that allows me to be creative again. But I get it.

The technology is so powerful, and its effects so immediate, that I understand the vitriol, I understand the rage. Not only is the fake art these machines “create” robbing their livelihood, it is stealing a piece of their soul. When art is used to train an AI without permission, it tells the artist that their art, into which they have poured a portion of their soul, is nothing more than a commodity to be harnessed and monetized. No artist should have to sue for this, much like an artist shouldn’t have to issue a cease and desist order to stop their work from being used in political ads they disagree with. If an artist does not want their art to be used to train AI, for any reason, the law should defer to the artist, regardless of how ‘transformative’ the AI fake art is. Look at Wojnarowicz vs. AFA (1990) or Grant vs. Trump (2020). The law says the artist’s work can’t be used, modified or unmodified, to promote a political agenda if the artist doesn’t want it to. Similarly, already-copyrighted work, such as photography in Fairey vs AP (2010), has to have proper attribution and permission. I’m not a legal scholar or lawyer, but it seems arguments over the definition of ‘transformative’ fall by the wayside when the issue is examined in light of Wojnarowicz and Fairey. More recently, Anthropic agreed to pay out 1.5 billion dollars for piracy (while not admitting wrongdoing). The copyright claims of the suit regarding fair use and transformative works were dismissed early, and the suit only covered the acquisition of copyrighted work. All of these cases ignore the moral law argument of how AI is used.

Even when a service is free, the company still profits from these practices. Providing a free, public-facing API, they are essentially using the end-user, the amateur AI ‘artists,’ to drive business to their professional tools. I don’t give any money to the company whose AI I use, and I’m not sure I could justify financially supporting any company that profits from generative ‘art.’ That’s a moral judgement I have to make for myself, and I’m not looking for any input on it. My personal feelings don’t have any effect on the truth, however: the current publicly-facing generative models are trained on art without the creators’ consent. Without their consent. To use art for anything, be it profit or critique, is to take a part of another person. This is why we have copyright laws in the first place: to protect. Protect one company from theft of their product; protect an artist from theft of profits; and protect the public from misrepresentation. While the letter of the law is more widely used to protect corporate profits, the spirit of the law extends to protecting the creator’s vision. Weird Al always asks permission to make a parody, even though he doesn’t legally have to. And that philosophy is part of what makes his art timeless.

I find it hilarious, if dismissive, that artists with moral objection to generative ‘art’ are derided as ‘Luddites.’ The O.G. Luddites were textile workers whose livelihoods were threatened by automation. For this reason, the term has become a derogatory label for anyone who resists a new technology. But this usage ignores the philosophy of those workers. Automation wasn’t just putting them out of a job. It was flooding the market with affordable, mass-produced clothing with no regard for artistic merit, except as how it could be translated into profit. They weren’t just part of a disappearing industry, they were being told that they were irrelevant.

Like I said, nuanced. I’m not going to stop creating, not now. Not after I have recovered from the mother of all dry spells, which included the belief I would never write again. And I will use modern technology to aid in that effort, because it allows me to create in ways I never could.

All the best,
LeslieTheLeveler
