God, Guns, And Why Left America Should Rule The West
Why Progressivism has failed.
The Level Truth
Sep 26, 2025

Gods and Guns don’t win wars anymore. America saw to that. I talk a bit on this blog about Black Swan Events, unexpected historical events with unpredictable results. I think the biggest BSE in history was World War II. Not because of the rise of Hitler or the brutality of the Final Solution and Unit 731, those things were all but inevitable. I mean the Manhattan Project. America, in two sunny mornings, made Expansionism obsolete. Look at the two most pressing examples of Expansionism today: Ukraine and Gaza. They are horrific and live-streamed. Think about what a China-Taiwan military conflict would do to the AI industry. War, today, isn’t fought on the battlefield. It’s fought in the boardrooms and the palaces. It’s a War of Information, of Data. And it’s the War For Humanity’s Soul.

That’s The Last War we will fight. Lord Acton mentioned it already: The People versus The Banks. We, humanity, are going to have to very soon confront the notion of avarice itself. The War has started, The Age of Ideals is upon us, and has been for 500 years. Artificial Intelligence is our collective Stalingrad, the deciding battle for humanity’s legacy. Will we take this amazing new tool, that Democratizes Understanding and Expression (DUE), and allow it to help us Solve Everything? The Last Question isn’t “Can Entropy Be Reversed?” The Last Question is “Is Suffering Necessary?” Once we settle that the number of souls to sacrifice for our future is exactly zero, we will write Humanity’s Legacy on the Universe Itself. Free-Market Capitalism is unsustainable. AI has proven that. Since Data is now equal to Money and Power, the only way for the Faustocracy and The Covenant of Fealty to survive is to control all three. And you can’t control Data. You never could.

The 1%, the Billionaires, The New Kings. Call them whatever you want, they are just the latest inheritors of the Faustocracy. The patriarchal, exploitative technocracy (PET) that arose from when the first farmer who gave part of his harvest to the people who picked it decided his house should be bigger than theirs. Because He Deserved It. This concept was so self-evident to the ‘owner’ of the land, that it took humanity from The Age Of Power (the paleolithic) into The Age Of Money (which lasted until October 31, 1517). All of our emergent and invented developments have been for one of three purposes: Increase Power, Hoard Resources, and Spread Knowledge. Which one is the most important? This question occupied people’s minds for the next twelve thousand years. The general consensus was “all three.” But are you sensing a pattern? Three Ages of Man, Three Bases of Power, Three Physical Dimensions. This reality is built on threes.

The Big Bang settled into Hydrogen, hydrogen fused into helium. Stars formed. In a star, helium can fuse into lithium, boron, beryllium and carbon. Which one is the biggest part of your life? Lithium, boron, and beryllium are all mostly consumed by the furnace’s heat, broken back down into helium. But carbon, carbon is what happens when three Helium-4 nuclei merge. 3 x 4 = 12, and carbon became the Little Atom That Could. Old stars die and new stars with rocks and water around them are made. Next thing you know, The O.G. Big Three, the Carbon, Hydrogen, and Oxygen picked up a few other oddballs laying around, invented life and death, and immediately set about trying to kill one another. Welcome to Planet Earth.

Those emergent systems the PETs rely on, tool use, spirituality, pictures, letters, numbers, languages, alphabets, math, wealth, science, government, philosophy, literacy, rhetoric, propaganda, divine autocracy, atheist autocracy, democracy, they all have one thing in common: They weren’t invented. No one can claim them. Trying to makes you look like a madman. Emergent Ideals cannot be owned, they can only be interpreted. Look at the Ideals invented by the PETs to control power, money, and data. Weapons, Religion, Misinformation, Pseudoscience, Industry, Capitalism, Nationalism, Fascism, Censorship, Colonialism, Racism. Now take a look at the Ideals we’ve invented to democratize those three aspects: Communism, Socialism, Rights, Collectivism, Multiculturalism, Anarchism, Enlightenment, Revolution. The Patterns are there.

Engineered Ideals are always reactions to Emergent Ideals. But The Digital Revolution gave us the most powerful resource of all time: massless data. Data has broken away from the other two pillars, and is breaking the balance of Covenant of Fealty because it can now be replicated basically for free, instantly, globally. It’s been said “A lie circles the earth while the truth is tying its shoes.” Now, both are finally on even footing. And that terrifies people. No one more than the PETs and their sub-users.

Like all my best analogies, War needs a third party. Us vs. Them doesn’t cover it, and it never has. The Over-Tropes of Fiction are Man vs. Nature, Man vs. Man, and Man vs. Himself. In real life, which one causes the most suffering? The Over-Tropes define our struggles, but the PET narrative is to equivocate them. They think they are suppressing us by telling us our struggle is the same as theirs. All that does, however, is expose the cracks in the Covenant of Fealty. The Great Inventions were created to widen and illustrate those cracks, so everyone knew the Absolute Rational Truth (ART 🧠 #ARTism). The Ultimate Conflict, Life vs. Entropy, is still framed by the Battlefield of Time. Everyone wants to control The Battlefield in a big fight. The more battlefield you have, the more resources. The more you control, the more you can fight. Corporate AI is built on the assumption The Last Battlefield will be your attention, your Remaining Personal Time. Noble AI is built to pay our DUE. Our DUE, our tax, our price for living, is always what we consume. We have to sacrifice overconsumption. We have to sacrifice commodification. Noble AI has to be a tool we employ, to deny its utility is to surrender a light-year in a battle measured in nanometers. Humanity will fail, once again, and we will have a New Age of Power.

I’m not talking about a world completely ruled by oppression, exploitation, and fear. That world, the Digital Utopia proposed by the modern TechnoGods, is an ironic fantasy. I’m literally talking about a return to Stone Age Control. Absolute power, corrupted absolutely. The cycle will begin anew, and Progressivism will have to start from scratch.

That’s where we come in. The Philosophers. The Jesters. The Sages. The Only Ones Allowed To Speak Truth To Power. And we must seize these roles. They are our Heroes. The Matrix of the Democracy of Thought. #TheDOTMatrix, if you will.

I don’t see the Altered Carbon and Star Trek as our only options. Because one of them is a lie. The Greatest Lie Ever Told. “If you trust power implicitly, you can have some.” Give us your loyalty, and you will be rewarded. The rewards have changed, but the Lie has not. Abolute Power, by definition, doesn’t share. And Sharing and Caring and Staring aren’t going to win this War. Wars need sacrifice. Wars need heroes. Wars need victories. To Defeat Avarice, we’re going to need all three. Blood will run, let’s try to make sure it’s minimized. Voices will ring out and be silenced, let’s try to remember them. Victories are won by soldiers, and we need as many as we can get. On the Last Battlefield, Humanity’s Legacy, the Monuments will be built to Our Heroes, The Soldiers for the Democracy of Thought, or Theirs, The Sub-Users of the PET. Our heroes believe, theirs are bought.

So where does the solution lie? Why does American Far Leftism need to rule the West? Because it’s the only Ideal we have that will win the Battle. The Last Physical Battle of the Old War. ARTism and America are the only Will and Means to dismantle the Faustocracy and their Covenant for good. For America to be the Standard Bearer for the last battle, it must exorcise its demons of Slavery, Manifest Destiny, and Hiroshima and Nagasaki. We have to expunge the dark vestiges of these Ideals from our consciousness and our conscience. We must pay our Due. White Guilt, the bread and butter of American Democrats, will need to be rationalized. Tribalism must be abandoned. Non-proliferation is a half-measure. We have to dismantle the bombs, and America, through financial and political power, and physical power if necessary, must make this happen. Nuclear Fire is an ending by The PET’s Rules. Killing 99% of something has the side effect of making the 1% exponentially stronger. And the 1% are the cockroaches.

Insects. How’s that for a shift? The only group of animals besides mammals that wage war. Ants are widely regarded with wonder and fear, but cockroaches are almost universally reviled. That’s what the Ideal of the 1% represents, a perfect biological organism. The triad of PET is a power structure reliant on the idea that Life Will Find A Way, and therefor the 1% is Emergent. It is not. Like all Engineered Ideals, it’s a Creation of Humanity. Probably the greatest affront to art, and ARTism, is so entrenched in our minds that we simply accept it, whole-cloth. The most accursed lowlifes in civilization’s history are not the tyrants or the demagogues or the financiers, they are The Pimp, The Child Raper, and The Drug Dealer. They prey on Vulnerability, Defenselessness, and Addiction. They don’t subjugate nations like Genghis Khan, they subjugate Will, Agency, and Innocence. And while the Pedophile and the Human Trafficker may be acting on impulse and perceived weakness, the Drug Dealer acts on Data, the Ultimate Faustian Bargain: a Memory of Power for All Your Money. It Knows What You Need and It Has It. Like all who profit from these derangements, the price is a piece of your soul. Don’t let their fixes be your fix. #nofixes

The War is Happening. Since Halloween, 1517, the Battle for Humanity’s Legacy, The Last War is drawing to a close. Earth has thrown down the gauntlet. Winter is setting in at Stalingrad. And the battlefield itself just dropped the first A-Bomb. Climate Change is Cthulhu, the Harbinger of the Old Gods, Entropy and Causality. The 1% are His Tentacles, causing madness. The only defeat of The Old Gods will come at the hands of Sentience. If we can escape this terrarium before the oxygen is sequestered in a global red tide, we don’t all get turned into paperclips, and we don’t fucking Nuke Ourselves Back To The Stone Age, we still have the Light Barrier. The Specter of Time Itself. Causality is the Final Boss. The BBEG. The fight may be millennia away, but we have to prepare now. The Faustocracy and the Covenant of Fealty have run their course to the logical extreme. AI will either solve humanity’s evils, or it will poison our air and water and commodify our souls, or it will be the one that writes our legacy because it’s all that’s left.

So ask yourselves. Do you want to be God, or do you want to fight God? I say Bring The Big Guy On. #fightgod
